Docs/yaml json source client import (#12634)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/sourcing-from-yaml.md

---

> title: "YAML as a source for building a site"

Reviewer: We should use more active titles that communicate the job to be done:
```suggestion
title: "Building a Gatsby site from YAML"
```

Author: Title changed

---

# Table of Contents

- [Introduction](#Introduction)
- [Setup](#Setup)
- [Adding Content](#Adding-some-content)
- [Gatsby Config](#Gatsby-configuration)
- [Gatsby Template](#Gatsby-Template)
- [Joining the pieces](#Joining-the-pieces)

> - [Sourcing from JSON](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/using-gatsby-without-graphql/)

Reviewer: We should make links match their URLs wherever possible:
```suggestion
- [Using Gatsby without GraphQL](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/using-gatsby-without-graphql/)
```

Author: Changed the title accordingly to match the existing item

## Introduction

> As you're presented with Gatsby, you'll see that you have at your disposal a myriad of ways to pull data into your website, ranging from the most used ones like [Contentful](https://www.contentful.com/), or [WordPress](https://wordpress.com/), [Drupal](https://www.drupal.org/), to the most edgier ones like [ButterCMS](https://buttercms.com/) or [GraphCMS](https://graphcms.com/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Gatsby, you have at your disposal a myriad of ways to pull data into your website, ranging from the most used ones like [Contentful](https://www.contentful.com/), or [WordPress](https://wordpress.com/), [Drupal](https://www.drupal.org/), to the most edgier ones like [ButterCMS](https://buttercms.com/) or [GraphCMS](https://graphcms.com/): each one with a corresponding plugin.
```

Author: Changed the wording to yours.

> Each one using the correspondent plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Author: Both this and the item below are removed as per your request.

> This tutorial will help you return to the origins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Instead of pulling data using any of the available plugins for each provider mentioned, you'll create a simple fully functional Gatsby website that is sourced from a YAML file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of pulling data using any of the available plugins for each provider mentioned, you'll create a fully functional Gatsby website sourced from a YAML file.
```

Author: Changed the wording to yours

## Prerequisites

Before we go through the details and code, you should be familiar with the basics of Gatsby.

Check out the [tutorial](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/tutorial/) and brush up on the [documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/).
In addition to this, some knowledge of [ES6 syntax](https://medium.freecodecamp.org/write-less-do-more-with-javascript-es6-5fd4a8e50ee2) will be useful.

Otherwise just skip this part and move onto the next part.

## Setup

You'll start by creating a new Gatsby website based on the official _hello world starter_.

Open up a terminal and run the following command.

```bash
gatsby new gatsby-sourcing-YAML https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-hello-world
```

After the process is complete, some additional packages are needed.

Change directories to the newly created Gatsby website and issue the following command:

```bash

> npm install --save js-yaml uuid

Reviewer: I wish we could just PR the starter to include this, but I see after looking at it that it's very bare bones.

Author: Lesson learned from a earlier pull request as @m-allanson pointed out . This and possible future examples will be based on the hello world starter

```

> Or if Yarn is being used:

Reviewer: I mentioned this in an earlier file, but we can drop the Yarn instructions from everything and allow users to focus on npm instead.

        semiotics artisan synth stumptown gastropub cornhole celiac swag. Brunch raclette
        vexillologist post-ironic glossier ennui XOXO mlkshk godard pour-over blog tumblr
        humblebrag. Blue bottle put a bird on it twee prism biodiesel brooklyn. Blue
        bottle ennui tbh succulents.
  links:
    - to: "/page5"
    - to: "/page1"
- path: "/page5"
  content:
    - item: St. agur blue cheese queso cheesecake.
        Cheesecake the big cheese monterey jack cheesecake monterey jack paneer halloumi rubber cheese.
        Cheese triangles cheese strings cheese slices cheesy feet taleggio cottage cheese when the cheese comes out everybody's happy gouda.
        Feta cauliflower cheese babybel cheese on toast monterey jack.
    - item:
        Bacon ipsum dolor amet short ribs brisket venison rump drumstick pig sausage
        prosciutto chicken spare ribs salami picanha doner. Kevin capicola sausage,
        buffalo bresaola venison turkey shoulder picanha ham pork tri-tip meatball meatloaf
        ribeye. Doner spare ribs andouille bacon sausage. Ground round jerky brisket
        pastrami shank.
  links:
    - to: "/page1"
```

> What the code block above is doing, is nothing more, nothing less, than creating a simple YAML object in which:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code block above creates a YAML object in which:
```

Author: Simplified the wording as per suggestion

> - Each `path` is a page's endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Each `path` is a page's endpoint (the relevant part of its URL).
```

Author: Added the suggestion

- The `contents` list holds some data to be displayed.
- The `links` list holds some endpoints to other pages.

## Gatsby configuration

Now that we have almost all the parts necessary in place, you'll need to make a small adjustment to your Gatsby website.

> Start by creating a `gatsby-node.js` with the following contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't already have one, start by creating a `gatsby-node.js` file with the following contents:
```

Author: Wording adjusted as per suggestion

```javascript
const fs = require("fs")
const yaml = require("js-yaml")
exports.createPages = ({ actions }) => {
  const { createPage } = actions
  const ymlDoc = yaml.safeLoad(fs.readFileSync("./content/index.yaml", "utf-8"))
  ymlDoc.forEach(element => {
    createPage({
      path: element.path,
      component: require.resolve("./src/templates/basicTemplate.js"),
      context: {
        pageContent: element.content,
        links: element.links,
      },
    })
  })
}
```

Breaking down the code into smaller parts:

1. The `js-yaml` package installed earlier is imported.
2. The `index.yaml` file is loaded and the content parsed.

> 3. Through the use of Gatsby's `createPage()` api, the parsed file will be used to create some pages programmatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Through the use of Gatsby's [`createPage()` API](/docs/actions/#createPage), the parsed file will be used to create some pages programmatically.
```

Author: Changed the phrase according to suggestion

> 4. Using the `context` property, will allow every piece of data you add there, to be accessible in the page as a special prop named `pageContext` allowing it to be consumed. You can read more about it [here](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/creating-and-modifying-pages/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The `context` property will pass your data into the page as a special prop named `pageContext`, allowing it to be consumed. You can read more about `context` in [creating and modifying pages](/docs/creating-and-modifying-pages/).
```

Author: Rephrased as per suggestion

## Review of the steps so far

Doing a quick review of what you have done so far:

> 1. Created a new Gatsby website based on a template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Created a new Gatsby website based on a starter.
```

Author: corrected the typo there

2. Added some dependencies to handle YAML files.
3. Created the file and folder structure to house the contents.

> 4. Configured Gatsby to fetch the data and create some pages programmatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Configured `gatsby-node.js` to fetch the data and create some pages programmatically at build time.
```

Author: Can i offer a compromise? 

Why not the following:

> 4. Extended Gatsby's default configuration through `gatsby-node.js` to fetch the data and create some pages programmatically at build time. 

With that small change and focusing on people that stumble onto this document when performing a search on the gatsby website or though a google search will know a priori that Gatsby offers a way to deal with the page creation or some configurations and data management.

## Gatsby Template

The only missing thing is the template used for each page created.

Create a file called `basicTemplate.js` in the `src/templates/` folder and add the following contents:

```javascript
import React from "react"
import uuid from "uuid"
import { Link } from "gatsby"
const basicTemplate = props => {
  const { pageContext } = props
  const { pageContent, links } = pageContext

  return (
    <div style={{ maxWidth: `960px`, margin: `1.45rem` }}>
      <div>
        {pageContent.map(data => {
          return <div key={uuid.v4()}>{data.item}</div>
        })}
      </div>

>       <div>

Reviewer: Let's make this more semantic with an unordered list:
```suggestion
      <ul>
```

Author: changes applied to both the example and document

        {links.map(item => {
          return (

>             <div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <li>
```

Author: changed the example and document code

              <Link to={item.to}>{item.to}</Link>

>             </div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            </li>
```

Author: Adjusted the code.

          )
        })}

>       </div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      </ul>
```

    </div>
  )
}
export default basicTemplate
```

## Joining the pieces

After all these steps are complete, you should have the following file and folder structure:

```
  |gatsby-sourcing-YAML
    |content
      - index.yaml
    |src
      |pages
        - index.js
        - 404.js
      |templates
        - basicTemplate.js
    - gatsby-node.js
```

> Issuing `gatsby develop` in the terminal and opening a browser window for instance, to `http://localhost:8000/page1`, you'll see a page with some content,sourced from YAML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running `gatsby develop` in the terminal and opening a browser window for instance, to `http://localhost:8000/page1`, you'll see a page with some content sourced from YAML.
```

Author: The corrections were applied as per suggestion

> To get it to work on your site, you would only need to copy over the `gatsby-node.js` file located [here](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/examples/using-gatsby-with-json-yaml/gatsby-node.js). The template located [here](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/examples/using-gatsby-with-json-yaml/src/templates/basicTemplate.js). And the yaml file located [here](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/examples/using-gatsby-with-json-yaml/content/templates/index.yaml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make this work on your existing Gatsby site, you would need to:
- Copy over the `gatsby-node.js` file contents: https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/examples/using-gatsby-with-json-yaml/gatsby-node.js
- Create a basic template: https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/examples/using-gatsby-with-json-yaml/src/templates/basicTemplate.js
- And grab the YAML file: https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/examples/using-gatsby-with-json-yaml/content/templates/index.yaml
```

Author: Applied the changes as per suggestion

        Feta cauliflower cheese babybel cheese on toast monterey jack.
    - item:
        Bacon ipsum dolor amet short ribs brisket venison rump drumstick pig sausage
        prosciutto chicken spare ribs salami picanha doner. Kevin capicola sausage,
        buffalo bresaola venison turkey shoulder picanha ham pork tri-tip meatball meatloaf
        ribeye. Doner spare ribs andouille bacon sausage. Ground round jerky brisket
        pastrami shank.
  links:
    - to: "/page1"
```

What the code block above is doing, is nothing more, nothing less, than creating a simple YAML object in which:

- Each `path` is a page's endpoint.
- The `contents` list holds some data to be displayed.
- The `links` list holds some endpoints to other pages.

## Gatsby configuration

Now that we have almost all the parts necessary in place, you'll need to make a small adjustment to your Gatsby website.

Start by creating a `gatsby-node.js` with the following contents:

```javascript
const fs = require("fs")
const yaml = require("js-yaml") // the yaml parser to be used being imported .
exports.createPages = ({ actions }) => {
  const { createPage } = actions

>   return new Promise(resolve => {

Author: Ups...copied over the wrong code block. It's now fixed

    //yaml file loaded here
    const ymlDoc = yaml.safeLoad(
      fs.readFileSync("./content/index.yaml", "utf-8")
    )
    //
    ymlDoc.forEach(element => {
      createPage({
        path: element.path,
        component: require.resolve("./src/templates/basicTemplate.js"),
        context: {
          pageContent: element.content,
          links: element.links,
        },
      })
    })
    resolve()
  })
}
```

Breaking down the code into smaller parts:

1. The `js-yaml` package installed earlier is imported.
2. The `index.yaml` file is loaded and the content parsed.
3. Through the use of Gatsby's `createPage()` api, the parsed file will be used to create some pages programmatically.

> 4. Using the `pageContext` property, some additional data will be provided to each page.

Reviewer 2: Should we maybe clarify that `context` used by `createPage` will translate into `pageContext` prop in react component?

Author: Corrected in the last commit. Changed the phrasing a bit
